<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html;charset=utf-8" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
<title>QT4 CG Meeting 002 Minutes 2022-09-13</title>
<meta name="generator" content="Org Mode" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/htmlize.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/notes.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div id="content" class="content">
<h1 class="title">QT4 CG Meeting 002 Minutes 2022-09-13</h1>
<div id="table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<div id="text-table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<ul>
<li><a href="#org10cb182">Minutes</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#org6e289c1">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/9]</code></a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#org42937dd">1. Administrivia</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#orgf0b0850">1.1. Roll call <code>[10/10]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#orgcedd931">1.2. Agenda</a></li>
<li><a href="#org3222d55">1.3. Approve minutes of the previous meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#org9673c54">1.4. Appoint chair and scribe for meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#orgfe9b5c6">1.5. Process and plan</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#orge5b0e84">1.5.1. GitHub labels</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#org941f2aa">1.6. Appointment of permanent co-chairs and editor</a></li>
<li><a href="#org4655b58">1.7. Diversity</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#orge2f6244">2. Technical Agenda</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#org89a41cb">2.1. XPath 4.0 functions</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#orgfc3baef">2.1.1. fn:all</a></li>
<li><a href="#org0d8eb37">2.1.2. fn:some</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#org0828cd4">3. Any other business</a></li>
<li><a href="#orge07f2d9">4. Adjourned</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org10cb182" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="org10cb182">Minutes</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-org10cb182">
<p>
Approved on <a href="./09-20.html#approve-minutes">20 September</a>.
</p>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org6e289c1" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org6e289c1">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/9]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-org6e289c1">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-01: NW to incorporate email feedback and produce new
versions of the process documents.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-02: RD to make a traige pass over the issues.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-03: NW to setup the GitHub labels as discussed in email.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-04: MK to add DN’s “op” function to the list.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-05: EP to make links from the GitHub README files to
the formatted specs.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-06: DN to make a GitHub issue to track the question of
whether we need array versions of all functions that take sequences.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-07: MK to make a pull request incorporating the
changes to fn:all.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-08: NW to investigate automatically generating
formatted specs from pull requests.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-002-09: MK to make a pull request incorporating the
changes to fn:some.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org42937dd" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="org42937dd"><span class="section-number-2">1.</span> Administrivia</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-1">
</div>
<div id="outline-container-orgf0b0850" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orgf0b0850"><span class="section-number-3">1.1.</span> Roll call <code>[10/10]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-1">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Anthony Bufort (AB)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Reece Dunn (RD)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Joel Kalvesmaki (JK) [x:35-]</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Michael Kay (MK)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> John Lumley (JL)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Dimitre Novatchev (DN)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Ed Porter (EP)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> C. M. Sperberg-McQueen (CSM)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Bethan Tovey-Walsh (BTW)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Norm Tovey-Walsh (NW)</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orgcedd931" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orgcedd931"><span class="section-number-3">1.2.</span> Agenda</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-2">
<p>
Agenda: <a href="../../agenda/2022/09-13.html">https://qt4cg.org/meeting/agenda/2022/09-13.html</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: I’d like to add a brief discussion about the labels.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept the agenda as amended?
</p>

<p>
No objections.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org3222d55" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org3222d55"><span class="section-number-3">1.3.</span> Approve minutes of the previous meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-3">
<p>
Minutes of the previous meeting:  <a href="https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Sep/0003.html">https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-xslt-40/2022Sep/0003.html</a>
</p>

<p>
Proposal: Accept the minutes as posted.
</p>

<p>
No objections.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org9673c54" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org9673c54"><span class="section-number-3">1.4.</span> Appoint chair and scribe for meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-4">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW volunteers, no objections.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Accepted</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orgfe9b5c6" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="orgfe9b5c6"><span class="section-number-3">1.5.</span> Process and plan</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-5">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: We talked about the process-y documents a lot last week, and
then in email. I’ll try to incorporate that feedback and see if
we’re all happy with the results.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Does anyone want to talk about them more this week?</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>

<p>
No one proposes to.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-01: NW to incorporate email feedback and produce
                                               new versions of the process documents.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li><p>
MK: We talked about process, but we didn’t talk a lot about plan.
</p>
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… do we start breadth first, by doing a plan and a requirements</li>
</ul>
<p>
document, or do we start depth first with some low hanging fruit
before doing a more breadth first view.
</p></li>
<li>JL: I agree with the implication that MK made last week that
actually getting some purchase by doing a little bit would be good.</li>
<li>DN: In regards to ordering the items, it would be a good idea to
make some kind of dependency graph. Don’t discuss things out of
order.</li>
<li>NW: Are you volunterring?</li>
<li>DN: Maybe we should traige the lists first</li>
<li>MK: Noting dependcies is part of that triage process</li>
<li>NW: Volunteers?</li>
<li>RD: I’ll take a pass.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-02: RD to make a traige pass over the issues.
</p>

<p>
Some discussion of labels and who can assign them.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>DN: Because we’re looking for people to scan for dependencies, the
person who made the proposal should also review the items they
proposed.</li>

<li>NW: Good. We’ll review that in the future.</li>
</ul>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orge5b0e84" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="orge5b0e84"><span class="section-number-4">1.5.1.</span> GitHub labels</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-1-5-1">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: I thought what came out of the email discussion was really good.
I suggest we adopt that for the time being, we can always change it
as we go.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-03: NW to setup the GitHub labels as discussed in email.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org941f2aa" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org941f2aa"><span class="section-number-3">1.6.</span> Appointment of permanent co-chairs and editor</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-6">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: DN proposed that having a co-chair would look better. He
suggested CSM and CSM has agreed.</li>
<li>CSM: I’m committing to co-chair for the next year, I plan to review
my commitments in a year and see where we are.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… the CG should probably do that too!</li>
</ul></li>
<li>NW: I agree</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: CSM and NW to co-chair.
</p>

<p>
No objections.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org4655b58" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org4655b58"><span class="section-number-3">1.7.</span> Diversity</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-1-7">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>BT: Are we going to do anything to try to encourage diversity?</li>
<li>CSM: Is there anything we can do?</li>
<li>BT: We can work out what we can do if the CG is willing to make a
commitment to try to encourage diversity.</li>
<li>DN: I don’t understand what’s being suggested.</li>
<li>BT: I think we should begin by making a commitment that we are
willing to try to increase the diversity of the group. I think it’s
hard to work out what we should do.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>…If I weren’t married to one of this group, I wouldn’t be here
because I wouldn’t feel fully comforable looking at this group. I
wouldn’t feel like this is a place for me. I’m the only woman in
this group and in the other CG I participate in.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>NW: I think diversity would be good!</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: The CG agrees that we should work to encourage diversity in
the group.
</p>

<p>
No objections.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>AB: I’d like to thank Bethan for a really gutsy and straight-foward</li>
</ul>
<p>
presentation of the problem. I’m a newcomer and I feel somewhat
intimidated by these meetings. It’s hard to overcome my introversion.
I volunteer to join BT to figure out what we can do. I already have
some ideas.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: Thank you. And thank you for being here.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orge2f6244" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="orge2f6244"><span class="section-number-2">2.</span> Technical Agenda</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-2">
</div>
<div id="outline-container-org89a41cb" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="org89a41cb"><span class="section-number-3">2.1.</span> XPath 4.0 functions</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-2-1">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>See <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/blob/master/editorial/functions-checklist.pdf">https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/blob/master/editorial/functions-checklist.pdf</a></li>
</ul>
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: What was your plan for this document, MK?</li>
</ul>

<p>
MK shares his screen to review the document.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: What I did was to start by listing the functions that either
were either already in the draft spec from 18 months ago, or were in
the issues list.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… It was a trawl through to find the functions that we have.</li>
<li>… The “usefulness” metric is more-or-less just gut feeling.</li>
<li>… Completeness is a little more objective</li>
<li>… Tests indicates where we have tests and some idea of completness</li>
</ul></li>

<li>MK: My feeling is to start by taking that first list and see if we
can approve them for incorporation in the spec.</li>
<li>DN: What about things that are missing?</li>
<li>MK: Let’s focus on what’s on the list first.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of what the current state is. These functions are in
the specification but this group hasn’t adopted the specs as a baseline.
</p>

<p>
Some discussion of the missing function that DN was referring to.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-04: MK to add DN’s “op” function to the list.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: I propose we go through them one at a time and see which ones we
can approve.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of where the specs are. The formatted specs are at
qt4cg.org, not directly in the repo.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-05: EP to make links from the GitHub README files to
the formatted specs.
</p>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orgfc3baef" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="orgfc3baef"><span class="section-number-4">2.1.1.</span> fn:all</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-2-1-1">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: I think there should be two signatures.</li>
<li>RD: Doesn’t the second example need to be fn:boolean#1?</li>
<li>MK: Yes. Thank you.</li>
<li>MK: The same logic applies to the first one which I was struggling with.</li>
<li>CSM: Question: am I right to think this is extensionally equivalent to  every $i in input…</li>
<li>MK: That’s what the rule says (…points to the rule in the spec…).
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>CSM: I missed it. I propose that the rule should be a code block, not inline code!</li>
</ul></li>
<li>CSM: This is just syntactic sugar for brevity?</li>
<li>MK: Not just for brevity. In a world of higher order functions, it
becomes useful to have functionality encapsulated in a function. You
can use this as an argument to array-filter, for example.</li>
<li>CSM: Now I’m puzzled by the signature returns xs:integer</li>
</ul>

<p>
Agreement that it should return xs:boolean.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>DN: Maybe it would be good if there is a function like this for arrays.</li>
<li>MK: Yes, as a general issue, should we have array functions
corresponding to every sequence function.</li>
<li>DN: I think it would be good so we don’t have to explain the distinction.</li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-06: DN to make a GitHub issue to track the question
of whether we need array versions of all functions that take
sequences.
</p>

<p>
Some discusssion of what namespace these are in.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: I’ve used a bit of syntax in the examples that we haven’t
approved yet. That might be a bad idea.</li>
<li>RD: I think it’s fine to keep it for now, if the syntax changes,
we’ll have to fix the examples.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: add fn:all to the consensus draft?
</p>

<p>
No objections.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-07: MK to make a pull request incorporating the
changes to fn:all.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-08: NW to investigate automatically generating
formatted specs from pull requests.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org0d8eb37" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="org0d8eb37"><span class="section-number-4">2.1.2.</span> fn:some</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-2-1-2">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: This is very similar to fn:all</li>

<li>DN: Are we going to provide implementation hints?</li>
<li>MK: I think those are general rules.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>We do often provide a sample implementation in XQuery or XSLT or both.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>NW: Are we going to try to do that for all the functions, or only where it provides extra clarity?</li>
<li>MK: I think we’ve tended to do it where it adds clarity.</li>
<li>DN: I think this would contribute to the clarity.</li>
<li>CSM: If I understand correctly, DN is suggesting that we have code
not to clarify the semantics of the function, which are given fairly
explicilty by the rule, but to clarify that an implementation is
allowed to short circuit the evaluation?</li>
<li>DN: No, those are two separate things.</li>
<li>JL: In both these examples, we have exactly that in the rule. You
could write this yourself if you were allowed to write a function in
the fn: namespace.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>What is of interest to me is what happens if you have an error later on.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: Error handling is defined by general rules for XPath. We don’t
like them, they’re horrible, but they exist!</li>
<li>DN: One more benefit is that it would ease testing. It can serve as
an oracle for testing.</li>
<li>NW: Can we try it out and see what we think?</li>
</ul>

<p>
The scribe missed some description of what a potential implementation
might look like, for fn:all?
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: The danger of providing a recursive implementation is that it
would appear to invalidate a parallel implementation. It would have
to be non-normative.</li>
<li>NW: Right, so the examples are sometimes more confusing.</li>
<li>CSM: I put this in chat:
  function($input, $predicate) as xs:boolean { every &#x2026; }
anything beyond that?</li>
<li>DN: I don’t understand what you’ve written.</li>
<li>CSM: If you asked me for a sample implementation, I’d write what
I’ve given above.</li>
<li>DN: Yes.</li>
<li>CSM: So the question in my mind is, is that all you wanted? I’d be
happy with the rules as they are, but if the point of this is how to
get from an expression to a function would work. In that case, it
could be normative.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>I take MK’s point, you don’t want to make the sample/reference
implementation more specific than it should be.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>DN: We just provide one implementation, we will not say that it is
the normative implementations.</li>
<li>MK: The constraints on error behavior can also be different.</li>
<li>DN: In any case, I think it’s preferable to have it.</li>
<li>RD: I was going to say in this case where it’s trivial, I don’t
think adding an implementation adds clarity. But it would make sense
in more complicated.</li>
<li>NW: I think that comes back to my question earlier, it makes more
sense when the functions are complicated. And DN is right, if the
example implementation is too complicated that’s going to help us
understand that maybe we’ve specified the function poorly.</li>
<li>MK: I’d forgotten that there are cases where we define it
normatively. I have no objection to using the same style.</li>
<li>EP: Yes, we’re almost there in the rules. The spec is in the rule,
we’d just have to wrap it in function and we’d be done.</li>
<li>AB: Doing it for examples where it’s complicated makes more sense to
me than doing it all the time.</li>
<li>BT: There’s one argument for doing for everything where you think
it’s very simple but the explanation makes you think maybe it’s more
complicated.</li>
<li>MK: You can’t give example implementations for all functions.</li>
<li>NW: Let’s go with adding them when it adds clarity.</li>
<li>MK: I’ll try to use the spec style and we can</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: add fn:some to the consensus draft?
</p>

<p>
No objections.
</p>

<p>
ACTION QT4CG-002-09: MK to make a pull request incorporating the
changes to fn:some.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-org0828cd4" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="org0828cd4"><span class="section-number-2">3.</span> Any other business</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-3">
<p>
Brief discussion of process and voting.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: With respect to voting, I’d rather not. My preferred style is to
ask if there are any objections. If there aren’t any, we can move
on. If there are, we have more discussion.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>If we get to vote counting, you’ve really backed me into a corner!</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-orge07f2d9" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="orge07f2d9"><span class="section-number-2">4.</span> Adjourned</h2>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
